---
author:
- CELE
content_type:
- blog
date: '2024-11-13'
description: 'Threatening dynamics on Internet governance: the case of Europe and the Digital Services Act DSA As part of
  their research on the topic, CELE has characterized a threat of regulation as “any kind of public or private utt'
featured: true
image: /img/shutterstock_1550506322-scaled.jpg
programs:
- policy
slug: threatening-dynamics-on-internet-governance-the-case-of-europe-and-the-digital-services-act-dsa
tags:
- institucional
title: 'Threatening dynamics on Internet governance: the case of Europe and the Digital Services Act (DSA)'
translationKey: wp-14022
type: posts
issues:
- Gobernanza de Internet
placements:
- hub: policy
  block: ultimas_noticias_analisis
  weight: 1
- hub: policy
  block: blog
  weight: 2
- hub: temas/gobernanza
  block: ultimas_noticias_analisis
  weight: 1
- hub: temas/amenazas
  block: ultimas_noticias_analisis
  weight: 1
---
# Threatening dynamics on Internet governance: the case of Europe and the Digital Services Act (DSA)

As part of their research on the topic, CELE has characterized a threat of regulation as “any kind of public or private utterance or action by public officials who hold regulatory power over others in which they express, suggest, or imply, clearly or veiledly, their desire to see their subject’s conduct move in a particular direction”. In the United States, this conduct is usually called _jawboning_. As described by Ramiro Álvarez Ugarte in a recent [piece](https://verfassungsblog.de/ruling-by-bullying/), this is an extremely complex area of law, in part because assessing when public officials cross such a legal line requires a complex understanding of both the scope and instruments of the existing legal framework, as well as the actual intention of obtaining a specific result which is not necessarily pre-determined or explicitly pursued by the law. In the European Union (EU), the [DSA](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2022/2065/oj) establishes a series of fundamental rules and principles regarding how intermediaries participate in the publication and distribution of online content. It especially focuses on content hosting and sharing platforms, such as Facebook, TikTok, Twitter, and YouTube. It also incorporates new important rights for users and obligations for service providers (particularly the so-called very large online platforms: VLOPs) in areas such as terms and conditions, transparency requirements, statements of reasons, advertising, protection of minors, complaint-handling systems, and out-of-court dispute settlements among many others. The DSA may and, in some aspects, has already become a regulatory area where the possible exertion of informal pressures deserves to be properly studied and analysed. Firstly, because the DSA explores unchartered regulatory territories on the basis, as it will be shown, of general legal principles and provisions that need to be primarily enforced by private actors (intermediaries). Secondly, because the complexity of the enforcement and monitoring system of the DSA requires the combined action of national regulators for each member state and the European Commission when it comes to the legal obligations applicable to big tech platforms that provide services across all European states and globally. This choice by the legislator (justified by the possible lack of capacity of national regulators to deal with such actors properly) has opened the door to concerns about the political profile of the Commission as well as the adoption of monitoring techniques closer to political statements than administrative procedures with safeguards and guarantees. Recent public acts by the so-far commissioner in charge of the DSA implementation have in fact confirmed such [concerns](https://www.euractiv.com/section/platforms/news/civil-society-criticises-commissioner-bretons-approach-to-eu-digital-rulebook/). This post will now examine some of the provisions included in the DSA which may be used by relevant authorities to impose on intermediaries the adoption of decisions affecting users’ content in non-properly accountable ways. 

## DSA areas for informal regulatory pressures

The DSA incorporates new provisions to facilitate the adoption of diligent measures against illegal content posted by plaforms’ users. According to article 9, providers of intermediary services must act against illegal content upon the receipt of an order issued by the relevant national judicial or administrative authorities. According to the mentioned article, the territorial scope of that order, based on the applicable rules of Union and national law, and, where relevant, general principles of international law, is limited to what is strictly necessary to achieve its objective. This relative legal ambiguity may however trigger the issuing of orders by specific national authorities based on local legislation addressing global platforms (VLOPs in particular) with the aim of pushing for content takedowns with extraterritorial effects. Since content distributed by this type of platforms is generally offered to all their users globally, platforms may be tempted to err on the side of caution and avoid further issues with the incumbent authorities, or with those from different jurisdictions, for example by establishing general filters without proper consideration of a potential impact on the right to freedom of expression. This risk was already highlighted, even before the DSA, in light of the problematic elements included in the decision from the EU Court of Justice in the case of [Glawischnig-Piesczek v. Facebook Ireland](https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=218621&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=1965965), as pointed out by some [experts](https://academic.oup.com/grurint/article-abstract/69/6/616/5831378?redirectedFrom=fulltext). Article 13 establishes that intermediaries that do not have an establishment in the Union shall designate a legal or natural person to act as their legal representative in this territory. This provision also emphasizes that “It shall be possible for the designated legal representative to be held liable for non-compliance with obligations under this Regulation, without prejudice to the liability and legal actions that could be initiated against the provider of intermediary services”. The need for at least a legal representative for providers that operate in the EU may seem a reasonable requirement, particularly considering the different duties and responsibilities that such companies are subjected to in this territory. However, it is also obvious that the possibility of specific legal or natural persons present in a certain state being held liable for infringements committed by global online platforms has been criticized, [in different contexts](https://www.article19.org/resources/turkey-dangerous-dystopian-new-legal-amendments/), as a tool that may favor the uncontested adoption of restrictive content measures even in cases where they may not be considered legally founded by the affected providers. Article 14 establishes that when enforcing their terms and conditions intermediaries shall act in a diligent, objective, and proportionate manner, particularly “with due regard to the rights and legitimate interests of all parties involved, including the fundamental rights of the recipients of the service, such as the freedom of expression, freedom and pluralism of the media, and other fundamental rights and freedoms as enshrined in the Charter.” Some [authors](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4286147) have, however, noted that this needs to be seen as a framework provision that creates a risk of overreliance on fundamental rights. A vague reference to human rights as a reference framework for private content moderation may open the door to the adoption of regulatory constraints that, precisely in the name of human rights, may guide or predetermine content moderation decisions in a specific direction. It is important to note the limitations on what international human rights law offers in practice in this field. [Evelyn Douek](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3709566) has referred to the lack of consensus with regard to the universality of freedom of expression as a human right, the gaps, inconsistencies, and differing interpretations that the international and regional human rights systems may present in some areas, the indeterminacy in many human rights norms, the lack of information or competency to conduct the assessment and balancing of interests necessary, as well as the challenges of a necessary paradigm shift in thinking about rights, from individualistic to systemic, within the context of online platforms. Article 22 DSA creates the figure of the “trusted flaggers” to identify a series of actors and organisations that are independent and have particular expertise and competence for the purposes of detecting, identifying, and notifying illegal content. These flaggers are entrusted with the responsibility of submitting notices “diligently, accurately and objectively”, which shall be given priority and be processed and decided upon by online platforms without undue delay. This status will be granted by national regulatory bodies. The DSA thus creates a system of local trusted expert organisations that will assist both platforms and authorities in the complex task of detecting and reporting illegal content at scale. This being said it needs to be noted that DSA accepts that this role may also be played by internet referral units of national law enforcement authorities or of Europol (Recital 61). This means that in order to force takedowns or the adoption of other restrictive measures, particularly in cases where the illegal nature of the piece of content in question is not completely clear or when there is a lack of will to follow ordinary legal procedures, certain public bodies may be tempted to use this regulatory “shortcut”. Some experts have also [warned](https://www.techpolicy.press/implications-of-the-eu-digital-services-act-on-critical-voices-in-serbia-challenges-for-civil-society-organizations-and-investigative-journalists/) about scenarios where certain types of trusted flaggers (following specific political agendas, for example) may deliberately flood platforms with notices tagging content as illegal or non-compliant with community guidelines particularly targeting CSOs or investigative journalists. A very relevant innovation incorporated by the DSA (articles 34 and 35) consists of additional obligations for VLOPs (very large online platforms with more than 45 million users) consisting of identifying and mitigating the different ways in which illegal content ends up disseminated through their services. It still remains unknown how platforms will end up assessing matters such as the actual impact of the dissemination of illegal content and its “systemic” nature, the complex interplay between illegal content and the violation of ToS, cross-platform proliferation, or the differences in the ways that different types of illegal content are disseminated. Moreover, systemic risks are not only associated with the dissemination of illegal content or causing negative effects on human rights, but also with other and much broader risk categories, such as negative effects on civic discourse, electoral processes, public security, gender-based violence, public health, minors, or users’ physical and mental well-being. This means that risk assessment and mitigation measures to be adopted by platforms according to the DSA will not only affect illegal forms of speech but also legal but harmful content, which is of course more problematic in terms of impact on freedom of expression. The language of articles 34 and 35, as well as the regime included under article 36 regarding the power of the Commission to require VLOPs to adopt specific content moderation measures “when a crisis occurs” (sic), has triggered [concern](https://verfassungsblog.de/dsa-rest-of-world/) as to the risk of back-room negotiations between regulators and platforms, which may end up opaquely defining the limits to legitimate expression on major platforms and vis-à-vis particularly sensitive areas, thus blurring the line between public and commercial interest. 

## Conclusion

The study of informal or indirect regulatory pressures in the field of Internet governance is increasingly becoming a very important area of legal analysis. This piece has shown that even an overall positive regulatory step forward such as the DSA may also encompass and create the risk of this kind of threatening dynamics within and beyond the European continent. In any case, further research in this area may face several methodological challenges such as the need to adopt an interdisciplinary approach (including law, political science, sociology, technology, and economics), address issues of data availability and access, properly comprehend jurisdictional complexities, consider geopolitical sensitivities, acknowledge power imbalances among different stakeholders, and properly deal with technological changes, among others. 

* * *

**[Spanish version below]**

# Amenazas u la gobernanza de Internet: el caso de Europa y la Digital Services Act (DSA)

Como parte de su investigación sobre el tema, el CELE ha caracterizado una amenaza de regulación como “cualquier tipo de expresión o acción pública o privada de funcionarios públicos que ostentan poder regulatorio sobre otros en la que expresan, sugieren o insinúan, clara o veladamente, su deseo de ver la conducta de su sujeto moverse en una dirección particular”. En Estados Unidos, esta conducta suele denominarse _jawboning_. Como lo describe Ramiro Álvarez Ugarte en un [artículo reciente](https://verfassungsblog.de/ruling-by-bullying/), esta es un área del derecho extremadamente compleja, en parte porque evaluar cuándo los funcionarios públicos cruzan esa línea legal requiere comprender tanto del alcance como de los instrumentos del marco legal existente, así como de la intención real de obtener un resultado específico que no está necesariamente predeterminado o perseguido explícitamente por la ley. En la Unión Europea (UE), la [DSA](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2022/2065/oj) establece una serie de reglas y principios fundamentales sobre cómo participan los intermediarios en la publicación. y distribución de contenidos en línea. Se centra especialmente en plataformas para compartir y alojar contenidos, como Facebook, TikTok, Twitter y YouTube. También incorpora nuevos derechos importantes para los usuarios y obligaciones para los proveedores de servicios (en particular, las denominadas plataformas en línea de gran tamaño: VLOP) en áreas como términos y condiciones, requisitos de transparencia, motivación, publicidad, protección de menores, tramitación de reclamaciones, y solución extrajudicial de conflictos, entre muchos otros. La DSA puede convertirse, y en algunos aspectos ya se ha convertido, en un área regulatoria donde el posible ejercicio de presiones informales merece ser estudiado y analizado adecuadamente. En primer lugar, porque la DSA explora territorios regulatorios inexplorados sobre la base, como se mostrará, de principios y disposiciones legales generales que deben ser aplicados principalmente por actores privados (intermediarios). En segundo lugar, porque la complejidad del sistema de aplicación y seguimiento de la DSA requiere la acción combinada de los reguladores nacionales de cada Estado miembro y de la Comisión Europea en lo que respecta a las obligaciones legales aplicables a las grandes plataformas tecnológicas que prestan servicios en todos los Estados europeos y a nivel mundial. Esta elección del legislador (justificada por la posible falta de capacidad de los reguladores nacionales para tratar adecuadamente a estos actores) ha abierto la puerta a preocupaciones sobre el perfil político de la Comisión, así como a la adopción de técnicas de seguimiento más cercanas a las declaraciones políticas que a procedimientos administrativos con salvaguardas y garantías. Los recientes actos públicos del hasta ahora comisionado a cargo de la implementación de la DSA han confirmado tales [preocupaciones](https://www.euractiv.com/section/platforms/news/civil-society-criticises-commissioner-bretons-approach-to-eu-digital-rulebook/). Esta entrada examinará algunas de las disposiciones incluidas en la DSA que pueden ser utilizadas por las autoridades pertinentes para imponer a los intermediarios la adopción de decisiones que afectan el contenido de los usuarios de manera no debidamente responsable. 

## Áreas de la DSA para presiones regulatorias informales

La DSA incorpora nuevas disposiciones para facilitar la adopción de medidas diligentes contra los contenidos ilícitos publicados por los usuarios de las plataformas. Según el artículo 9, los proveedores de servicios intermediarios deben actuar contra los contenidos ilícitos previa orden emitida por las autoridades judiciales o administrativas nacionales competentes. Según el citado artículo, el alcance territorial de dicha orden, basado en las normas aplicables de la Unión y el orden jurídico nacional, y, en su caso, de los principios generales del derecho internacional, se limita a lo estrictamente necesario para alcanzar su objetivo. Sin embargo, esta relativa ambigüedad legal puede desencadenar la emisión de órdenes por parte de autoridades nacionales específicas basadas en la legislación local que aborda las plataformas globales (VLOP en particular) con el objetivo de impulsar la eliminación de contenidos con efectos extraterritoriales. Dado que el contenido distribuido por este tipo de plataformas generalmente se ofrece a todos sus usuarios a nivel global, las plataformas pueden verse tentadas a pecar de cautelosas y evitar mayores problemas con las autoridades a cargo, o con aquellas de diferentes jurisdicciones, por ejemplo estableciendo filtros generales sin una consideración adecuada de un posible impacto sobre el derecho a la libertad de expresión. Este riesgo ya fue puesto de relieve, incluso antes de la DSA, a la luz de los elementos problemáticos incluidos en la decisión del Tribunal de Justicia de la UE en el caso [Glawischnig-Piesczek v. Irlanda](https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=218621&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=1965965), como señalan algunos [expertos](https://academic.oup.com/grurint/article-abstract/69/6/616/5831378?redirectedFrom=fulltext). El artículo 13 establece que los intermediarios que no tengan domicilio en la Unión designarán una persona física o jurídica para que actúe como su representante legal en este territorio. Esta disposición también enfatiza que será “posible que el representante legal designado sea responsable del incumplimiento de las obligaciones establecidas en este Reglamento, sin perjuicio de la responsabilidad y acciones legales que pudieran iniciarse contra el prestador de servicios intermediarios”. La necesidad de al menos un representante legal para los proveedores que operan en la UE puede parecer un requisito razonable, especialmente considerando los diferentes deberes y responsabilidades a los que están sometidas dichas empresas en este territorio. Sin embargo, también es obvio que se ha criticado la posibilidad de que personas físicas o jurídicas específicas presentes en un determinado Estado sean consideradas responsables de las infracciones cometidas por plataformas globales en línea, [en diferentes contextos](https://www.article19.org/resources/turkey-dangerous-dystopian-new-legal-amendments/), como herramienta que puede favorecer la adopción indiscutible de medidas restrictivas de contenidos incluso en los casos en los que no puedan ser consideradas legalmente fundadas por los proveedores afectados. El artículo 14 establece que al hacer cumplir sus términos y condiciones, los intermediarios actuarán de manera diligente, objetiva y proporcionada, en particular “teniendo debidamente en cuenta los derechos e intereses legítimos de todas las partes involucradas, incluidos los derechos fundamentales de los destinatarios del servicio, como la libertad de expresión, la libertad y el pluralismo de los medios de comunicación, y otros derechos y libertades fundamentales consagrados en la Carta”. Algunos [autores](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4286147) han señalado, sin embargo, que esto debe verse como una disposición marco que crea un riesgo de dependencia excesiva de los derechos fundamentales. Una vaga referencia a los derechos humanos como marco de referencia para la moderación de contenidos privados puede abrir la puerta a la adopción de restricciones regulatorias que, precisamente en nombre de los derechos humanos, pueden guiar o predeterminar las decisiones de moderación de contenidos en una dirección específica. Es importante señalar las limitaciones de lo que el derecho internacional de los derechos humanos ofrece en la práctica en este campo. [Evelyn Douek](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3709566) se ha referido a la falta de consenso respecto a la universalidad de la libertad de expresión como derecho humano, las lagunas, las inconsistencias y las diferentes interpretaciones que los sistemas internacionales y regionales de derechos humanos pueden presentar en algunas áreas, la indeterminación de muchas normas de derechos humanos, la falta de información o competencia para llevar a cabo las evaluación y equilibrio de intereses necesarios, así como los desafíos de un cambio de paradigma necesario en el pensamiento sobre los derechos, de individualista a sistémico, dentro del contexto de las plataformas en línea. El artículo 22 de la DSA crea la figura de los _trusted flaggers_ para identificar una serie de actores y organizaciones que son independientes y tienen especial experiencia y competencia a los efectos de detectar, identificar y notificar contenidos ilícitos. A estos actores se les encomienda la responsabilidad de presentar notificaciones “con diligencia, precisión y objetividad”, las cuales tendrán prioridad y serán procesadas y resueltas por las plataformas en línea sin demoras indebidas. Este estatus será otorgado por los organismos reguladores nacionales. De este modo, la DSA crea un sistema de organizaciones locales que ayudarán tanto a las plataformas como a las autoridades en la compleja tarea de detectar y denunciar contenidos ilegales a escala. Dicho esto, cabe señalar que la DSA acepta que este papel también lo puedan desempeñar las unidades de referencia en Internet de las autoridades nacionales encargadas de hacer cumplir la ley o de Europol (considerando 61). Esto significa que para forzar la eliminación o la adopción de otras medidas restrictivas, particularmente en los casos en los que la naturaleza ilegal del contenido en cuestión no está completamente clara o cuando no hay voluntad de seguir los procedimientos legales ordinarios, ciertos públicos los organismos pueden verse tentados a utilizar este “atajo” regulatorio. Algunos expertos también han [advertido](https://www.techpolicy.press/implications-of-the-eu-digital-services-act-on-critical-voices-in-serbia-challenges-for-civil-society-organizations-and-investigative-journalists/) sobre escenarios en los que ciertos tipos de alertadores confiables (que siguen agendas políticas específicas, por ejemplo) pueden inundar deliberadamente plataformas con avisos que etiquetan contenido como ilegal o incumplimiento de las directrices comunitarias, especialmente dirigidas a organizaciones de la sociedad civil o periodistas de investigación. Una innovación muy relevante incorporada por la DSA (artículos 34 y 35) consiste en obligaciones adicionales para las VLOP (plataformas en línea de gran tamaño con más de 45 millones de usuarios) consistentes en identificar y mitigar las diferentes formas en que los contenidos ilegales terminan difundidos a través de sus servicios. Todavía se desconoce cómo las plataformas acabarán evaluando cuestiones como el impacto real de la difusión de contenidos ilegales y su naturaleza “sistémica”, la compleja interacción entre los contenidos ilegales y la violación de los ToS, la proliferación entre plataformas o las diferencias en las formas en que se difunden los diferentes tipos de contenidos ilegales. Además, los riesgos sistémicos no sólo están asociados con la difusión de contenidos ilegales o con efectos negativos sobre los derechos humanos, sino también con otras categorías de riesgo mucho más amplias, como efectos negativos sobre el discurso cívico, los procesos electorales, la seguridad pública y la violencia de género, la salud pública, los menores o el bienestar físico y psíquico de los usuarios. Esto significa que las medidas de evaluación y mitigación de riesgos que deben adoptar las plataformas según la DSA no sólo afectarán a las formas ilegales de expresión sino también a los contenidos legales pero nocivos, lo que, por supuesto, es más problemático en términos de impacto en la libertad de expresión. El lenguaje de los artículos 34 y 35, así como el régimen incluido en el artículo 36 respecto de la facultad de la Comisión de exigir a los VLOP que adopten medidas específicas de moderación de contenidos “cuando se produzca una crisis” (sic), ha desencadenado [preocupación](https://verfassungsblog.de/dsa-rest-of-world/) en cuanto al riesgo de negociaciones secretas entre reguladores y plataformas, que pueden terminar definiendo de manera opaca los límites a la expresión legítima en las principales plataformas y frente a zonas particularmente sensibles, desdibujando así la línea entre el interés público y el comercial. 

## Conclusión

El estudio de las presiones regulatorias informales o indirectas en el campo de la gobernanza de Internet se está convirtiendo cada vez más en un área muy importante del análisis jurídico. Este artículo ha demostrado que incluso un paso regulatorio positivo en general, como la DSA, también puede abarcar y crear el riesgo de este tipo de dinámica amenazadora dentro y fuera del continente europeo. En cualquier caso, futuras investigaciones en esta área pueden enfrentar varios desafíos metodológicos, como la necesidad de adoptar un enfoque interdisciplinario (que incluya derecho, ciencias políticas, sociología, tecnología y economía), abordar cuestiones de disponibilidad y acceso a datos, comprender adecuadamente las complejidades jurisdiccionales, considerar las sensibilidades geopolíticas, reconocer los desequilibrios de poder entre las diferentes partes interesadas y abordar adecuadamente los cambios tecnológicos, entre otras cosas.
